Restoration of Valentine IXDD WD No. T82527DD

This tank was built by Metropolitan Cammel in 1943 at their Midland 
works, Washwood Heath, Birmingham. It was one of a batch of Valentines 
built under order number TM 6118. This had been placed on 7 October 1941 
and was originally made out for 52x Mk V, 16x Mark IX, 75x Mark VDD 
and 312x Mark IXDD. This order was altered later to show 92x Mark IX, 
127x Mark VDD and 236x Mark IXDD. The order actually states "Special 
Hulls" (rather than DD) which referred to hulls with thinner than normal 
sides (43mm instead of 50 mm) and also a hole bored in the rear plate to 
accommodate the power take-off. The contract price was £5,021 each with a 
number of items being "free issue", for example engine, transmission and 
weapons. The DD equipment was the subject of a separate order 
TMJ294/1025 at £1,193 each. It is understood that hulls for these machines 
were built at both Washwood Heath in Birmingham and Old Park Works in 
Wednesbury. They were fitted with turrets from Stothert and Pitt in Bath, 
supplied as complete assemblies and then moved to a secure compound at 
Washwood Heath for the DD equipment to be fitted in great secrecy.
The tank was delivered to the Army in about the spring of 1943 and its 
service is unknown but when purchased for restoration it had 122 miles 
recorded. It also had signs of a workshop overhaul in that the inside had 
been repainted but without removing major components like the oil tank. 
Seaside type sand was also noted in some of the crevices. It is known that 
the riveted hull Valentine amphibious tanks started to leak at the riveted 
joints after about a hundred miles and so it is probable that the tank was used 
for several practice landings and then returned for a service and a tightening 
of the rivets. It seems it was then stored until disposed of in 1946/7 to G. R. 
Mole Brothers of Clows Top by Kidderminster. This company started to sell 
Military surplus equipment after the First World War and continued in this 
business until it closed down in the 1960's.
In 1947 the tank was sold to Harold Ellard, along with Mark III Valentine 
T121944 with the intention of making them into bulldozers. He paid £450 
each for them with tools and delivery as extras. The Mark III arrived without 
a turret according to verbal information I received in 1984 and at this time 
this hull was complete in all respects apart from the turret and the turret 
drive electrics. It is uncertain if this hull was ever fitted with a turret of the 
correct type prior to disposal. It was professionally restored and is now in 
the Cors Museum in Virginia, USA.

The Mark IXDD came with its turret and part of the contract was that it would be disarmed,
a clause sometimes referred to as the "Smelting condition". The Mark IXDD 's turret was 
removed and cut up with oxy-acetalene and most of the parts left outside. The rear of the
platform was also cut off and this, along with the turret turntable was all thrown outside.
A small portion of the turret side with the traverse gear, the propeller drive and the turret
roof were kept in Mr Ellard's factory in Wednesfield, Wolverhampton with the hull. The engine
covers, were removed and placed outside and the driver's doors, driver's roof plate and the 
right hand radiator door were removed but their fate is unknown. The hinges on the left-hand
radiator door were cut but the door was not removed. The fate of the propeller is unknown 
(but was rumoured to have been kept in store until 1984 when it's location could not be 
ascertained. It probably became a souvenir of an employee of the factory). On 25 December 
1983 Mr. Ellard died and left his property to United Charities, i.e. The Freemason organisation.
They decided to liquidate the donation and the contents of the factory, which had become 
somewhat of a store, was auctioned on 10 July 1984. The Mark IXDD was purchased by myself 
by way of a bank loan, money already in the bank due to an insurance payout for a boat that 
was accidentally burned and a personal loan from Mr Thomas Wardroper, a friend. Restoration 
was initially at Hill Farm, Essington, then at Watt Meadow Farm and since 1994 at Ride Farm, 
Essington. Initially I was able to use engineering facilities at the late Mr Ellard's factory 
but this closed in April 1985. Up to his death I was assisted by my late father in law Frank 
Addison who had been a toolmaker at Ellard's. Facilities have included the use of his lathe
and a further lathe of my own, one of which is configured as a milling machine. I have hand
metal forming machinery, a Bedford crane, 2 sets of oxyacetylene equipment a MMA welder (140 amp) 
and a MIG welder for thinner sections and an air compressor. As well as making parts myself,
some parts have been made by Barnshaw Benders. The rest of the work is completed with hand 
tools. I have no regular workforce but have received help from a number of people, most 
regularly my sons. Work progressed slowly for many years and a proportion of what was made
was subsequently disposed of due to poor quality workmanship. A Valentine Mark I turret was 
obtained from Sennybridge training area and fitted in late 1988. It was removed in 2001. 

Present state (August 2004) 
Turret
Progress was much more rapid once a turret ring and other parts were 
obtained from New Zealand in spring 2001. The original gun mounting, 
turret front, sides, and front half of the roof plate have been combined with a 
rear bustle from a New Zealand Mark V, a turret ring from another N. Z. 
Mark V and a replacement rear roof plate cut from mild steel. Suspended 
from this turret is a replacement turret basket made from mild steel, some 
parts bent by Barnshaw Benders and some by myself. The turret has an 
original 6 pdr Mark WN gun tube that was rebored after the war to approx. 
67-mm for tests. A 75mm breech ring is fitted. This ring appears to have 
been made from a billet of steel intended for a 6 pdr and exhibits some of the 
features of both but is clearly marked 75mm. The remains of the original 
recoil shield are to be repaired. New periscopes and telescopic sights have 
been fitted. I am in the process of making the extended periscopes for use 
with the screen erected.

Hull
The trackguards have been extended to the original profile. The 4 original 
engine covers have been grit-blasted. A replacement for the missing section 
has been made from mild steel combined with some components recovered 
from Studland Bay. The missing RHS radiator door has been replaced with 
one from a Valentine target from Sennybridge range which has necessitated 
some realignment of the hinges due to this being built to suit 60mm 
sideplates. Drivers roof plate and hatches have been replaced with ones from 
Valentine Mark I T16420 from a range at Pirbright in Surrey. The drivers 
roof plate had to have turret protection angle added in mild steel as this is 
not fitted to the Mark I. The brass identification plate has been replaced with 
a replica cast from an original also recovered from Studland. All of the 
remaining interior fittings of the hull are original.

Engine/transmission.
The engine and transmission were fully functioning when purchased but 
were removed in 1988 to free a stuck clutch plate. Some pipe work has been 
replaced and the starter motor serviced. The radiators were showing 
considerable corrosion of the header tanks due to galvanic corrosion and 
were removed for repair. The radiator bottom water connecting steel tube 
was very corroded but has been repaired by welding on patches rather than 
being replaced to retain as much authentic material as possible.

DD equipment
The compass and binnacle equipment has been replaced with components 
recovered from Studland bay. The rear compass mounting will be replaced 
by an identical fitting from a Cavalier tank but the lower mounting bracket 
for this will have to be guesswork. The steering and propeller raising 
equipment has been remade. The remanufactured frame props are finished, 
as is the tubing for the frame, including the hinges. The frame clamps are 
drilled and located on the frames and some of the canvas attachment strips 
are made. The material for the remainder is to hand. A prototype canvas 
screen has been made to obtain dimensions and to discover the difficulties of 
making the screen in situ rather than completing it and then fitting later. This 
screen has been fitted for the 2004 season and will be replaced with the 
correct one once that is completed The air tubes are fitted and the whole 
system works, raising and lowering but it requires access to an air supply for 
it to function. The bases of the air tubes have been made with a simplified 
system of air dump system. An original propeller was obtained from a diver 
who had recovered it from Studland Bay but this went missing in mysterious 
circumstances in 1992. Another Studland propeller was used as a master for 
a casting in about 1993 but this casting was not fettled until 2002. The 
propeller lifting and steering system is fully functional but the hydraulic 
connections between the driver's controls and the rear duplicates has yet to 
be connected.
Information used/compromises/errors

Vehicle identity
The WD number on Valentines is marked on the driver's door and on the brass maker's plate on 
the lhs trackguard, all of which are missing. The individual parts are marked in the factory but 
photographs of construction show the use of paint or chinagraph pencil rather than stamping so 
this detail is lost under subsequent paint. When the engine was removed in 1988 one of the thin 
pieces of ducting around the lhs radiator had the number 1022 hand written on it with china graph 
but this had subsequently disappeared due to surface rusting by 2001. In 2003, several '1022' or 
`22' numbers were found under the paint. At Bovington there is a book listing engine numbers 
fitted to tanks when built but this stops in the T60,000 series so the engine number, although 
visible is no use in identifying the tank's number. When purchased, the tank came with an 
original Valentine IX handbook with the number "82527" hand written at the top of the 
specification page and it also included the original receipt from G. R. Mole Brothers in the 
flyleaf. One of the identity plates recovered from Studland shows the WD number as T82546 and 
the chassis build number as M1041. Other machines built by Metro Cammel show chassis 
numbers starting with either OP or M. An ex-employee told me that the same system was in use 
into the 1970's and relate to the products of the Old Park factory in Wednesbury and the Midland 
factory in Washwood Heath, Birmingham, respectively. It will be noted that the vehicle built 19 
tanks before T82546 at Midland works would have been T82527 which by the same calculation 
would have had M1041 minus 19 equals chassis number M1022. This coincidence with the 
numbers on the vehicle and the handbook is too improbable to consider unless this tank is indeed 
T82527. Attempts have been made to find items that contradict this without success, for example 
the engine of T82527 should be the later 165-horse power version according to the handbook and 
it is. The tank is clearly an early Mark IX due to the Mark V lighting system and was probably 
ordered as a "land" Mark IX originally which accounts for the 4" smoke dischargers mounting on 
the turret. Accordingly, the replica brass maker's plate has been marked as T82527DD/M1022. 
This plate itself has been cast as a copy of a plate recovered from Studland with the detail of the 
original numbers scraped from the sand mould prior to casting. The crude stamping of "DD" 
follows the original pattern. The meaning of "WT" is unknown: it would usually signify that the 
vehicle was fitted with radio (Wireless telegraphy) but all Valentines were so equipped but not all 
surviving Identity Plates have the marking.

Turret
The exterior parts are largely original to the vehicle with the exception of one half of one hatch 
the right hand triangular filler plate and the rear section of the roof plate, which are cut from mild 
steel. The hatch is copied from an original as the parts list states they are identical. The hinges are 
original to this vehicle except one pair recovered from a Valentine I target from Sennybridge. The 
turret bustle came from a Valentine Mark V from New Zealand but is identical to the remains of 
the original bustle and the parts list state they are identical. The "A" set aerial mounting is the 
original, with a repair to the rhs flange, damaged by oxy-acetalene when the turret was cut. The 
"B" set aerial is an original with copy cage and base bracket. The turret ring came from a 
different Mark V from New Zealand and although similar is not identical to the Mark IX in that 
the turret traverse mechanism is mounted some 3 inches to far in a clockwise direction if the 
turret is viewed from above. Unless this is altered then it will not be possible to fit the electric 
motor to the traverse mechanism. Due to its different position it has been necessary to shorten one 
of the brackets that mount the platform side plates to the turret ring. These mounting plates are 
based on one original found in the hull but are bent from 75x50x6-mm angle iron where the 
original was made from thinner material. The 50-mm leg has been shortened to match the original 
profile. The positioning and proportions of the brackets have been determined by scaling up the 
parts list and comparing them in appearance to illustrations in the Valentine Mark IX stowage
diagrams. The apparently strange "overlapping" appearance of these brackets has been copied. 
The 4" smoke discharger bracket is original to the turret and the stowage for the 4" smoke 
grenades/flare pistol was copied from the fragmentary remains found in the turret upon purchase. 
N.B. The stowage lists and pictures for the IX DD state these are NOT fitted but these fittings are 
original, as is the turret lighting arrangement, listed as being for Mark V's only in the parts list.  
The gun mounting and elevation system is original with some of the lighter components of the 
firing mechanism replaced, based on the parts list. The bullet splash shields are largely original 
except for the left hand one. This has been cut by Oxy acetylene when the turret was cut and had 
then suffered corrosion. It will be replaced with a piece based on the parts list but actually made 
to fit the original parts and the existing bolt holes as the parts list and the remaining parts do not 
entirely agree in shape. The turret platform frame has been made from 75x50x6-mm mild steel 
angle iron bent by Bamshaw Benders. They also plasma cut the 3mm floor plate. The remainder 
of the floor framing is made of second hand channel and the centre fitting for the electrical 
connections came from a Mark I from Sennybridge. The general arrangement and the length of 
the vertical plates came from geometric calculations from the parts list. The metal thicknesses are 
probably excessive compared to the originals and the circular part of the frame should probably 
be 3x1x3/16 inches. The thickness of the plates is the nearest metric equivalent to measurements 
taken on Bovington's Mark I. The ammunition stowage is taken from life-size expansions of the 
parts list. The internal construction, apart from what is shown in the parts list is conjecture. There 
is one lid remaining, found in the hull used to scale the reconstruction and metal thickness of the 
lids. One of the adjusting screws for the commander's seat is original. The loaders seat is largely 
made from a similar part from a Sennybridge Mark I with a new base. Although of similar shape 
and appearance, the seat base should be metal on the Mark IX, not wood as in the Mark I.. Except 
for the stowage above the radio which is repaired original and the bracket for the turret ventilation  
fan, all internal stowage and fittings are taken from the parts list apart from the smoke grenade 
box mentioned. The overhead conduit and turret ventilation fan switch is original. The lights 
follow the original pattern, that is the arrangement usually met in the Mk V only. The sighting 
vane is a replacement bracket and shafts copied from the original. All of the periscope guards are 
original in their original positions with new internals.

Hull
Original except for drivers doors and roof plate, right hand radiator door and the right hand, rear 
engine cover section. The inner section of the trackguards are original and have been re-extended 
to replace sections cut off, supposedly to enable the vehicle to pass a narrow doorway at Ellardis. 
The width of the guards came from measurement from the same source used for the location of 
most of the airbase brackets and their profiles. The radiator props are new fabrications, copied 
from Bovington's and rusted remains from Sennybridge. The rear platform is made to 
measurements taken from the remains of the original found in 1984 in a very fragile state due to 
rust. The propeller guard sides are original with new brackets and angle irons made from the 
nearest size of metric angle iron. The cross brace at the rear is a new fabrication in the nearest 
metric equivalent angle iron to the fragmentary remains discovered with the platform rear. The 
original was welded to each platform and the top of the propeller cover part of the rear platform 
but this prevents removal of any of the parts. It is proposed not to weld the one on this vehicle but  
to bolt it to the centre section and attach it to each trackguard by blind bolts into welded pads 
allowing subsequent removal of any parts. The rhs front idler bracket was torn from the hull in 
1988 in an accident and has been repaired by Adrian Barrel. Vehicle "temporarily" fitted with one 
from Sennybridge Mark I. LHS bracket strained requires repair. Sign in driver's compartment 
warning of need to switch off batteries is a replacement copied from Bovington's. Brass circuit 
diagram on His hull side is a recovered item from Studland. Note that the driver's light fittings (2 
festoons) are more usually associated with the Mark V according to the parts list but this is the 
original arrangement although the light fittings themselves are replacements.

Engine/transmission
No major modifications or changes. The fan belts and hoses have been changed and a rusted steel 
drain pipe from the water pump has been replaced with a brass one but apart from that everything 
is as built.

DD equipment
(Mechanism)
The steering and lifting equipment is all new fabrication, based on the remains of the items in the 
platform rear. Some assistance also obtained from scaling up the parts list. There is one known 
error in that the bracket holding the end bearing on the lifting arm should be mounted on a 'A inch 
thick pad to the vertical plate but the bracket has been made 'A inch too long and is mounted 
directly upon the plate. Most of the fittings, which will be underwater, should be mounted on 
pads with blind bolts from the wet side instead of through bolts as I have done in error. The brass 
bushes and bolts along with the larger fork end on the steering drag link are all original parts. The 
power take off is original with new bearings. The chrome ball requires some building up with 
weld of some pitting and will then be re-chromed. The propeller shaft was bent about 10 degrees 
when received and has been straightened by cold bending with a pipe bender. It is unlikely to be 
sufficiently straight or strong to drive the vehicle if it is ever floated. The propeller is a 
replacement cast by myself and has several flaws. It will only be barely balanced statically and 
this combined with the straightened shaft mean it would be dangerous to use in the manner 
designed. The original for the casting was a genuine Valentine DD propeller from Studland but 
no allowance was made for shrinkage and so it is slightly smaller than the original. The hydraulic 
lift and steering mechanisms are original but the end of one shaft has been reduced in diameter to 
obscure severe rusting. It is intended to add a hand lifting facility to the free end of the lifting  
mechanism, using the hand tiller so that the lift and steer mechanism can be demonstrated by one 
person. This is NOT an original system.

Frame and screen
To determine the pipe size, a number of factors were used: 1/ Scaling up the parts list. 2/ Careful 
measurement of rust layers in a piece of tubing recovered from Studland. 3/ The likely hood that a 
standard (for the 1940's) tubing section would have been used. 4/ That for a given weight of 
metal, the larger the pipe and the thinner the section (within reason) the more rigid the structure.  
5/ The diameter of the brass air tube clamps, making allowances for the thickness of the rubber 
tubing. All of these considerations led to the same conclusion that it was 2-inch nominal thin wall 
tubing. The frame tubing is 60.8mm-old mild steel welded seam pipe with a nominal wall 
thickness of 3.9mm. This is an almost exact metric equivalent of what the original pipe was, 2- 
inch nominal bore water pipe and it was bent in old 2-inch dies. Barnshaw Benders made the 
"corner" bends to a radius obtained from the parts list, scaled up with the known trackguard 
width. The remainders of the bends were bent with a hand operated hydraulic bender to fit the 
trackguard edge and to fit with each other. The only reference was photographic and more 
attention was paid to making them fit rather than trying to be exact replicas although no errors are  
known about at this stage. The rubber tube to frame clamps are a mixture of originals from 
Studland Bay and replacements cast from originals. The ones for the bent sections of the frame 
show that the clamps and tubes are fitted to the outside of the frame and not inside as with the 
Sherman DD. The brackets on the frame for the lower screen struts are flame cut blanks scaled up 
from the parts list, using the one genuine lower link to obtain the drawings true scale. The upper 
bracket is taken from the same drawing, but is incorrect in that it is for a Mark VDD. No details 
of the Mark IXDD parts are known but the part numbers are different so they cannot be identical. 
The lower screen struts are copies from the original lower link found in the hull and an adjustable
link recovered from Studland. The fork ends are from the parts list. The adjustable upper link is 
copied from one recovered from Studland but it is not known if this is a front or rear piece. It was 
hoped that this would become evident when trying to raise the front and the back of the frame to 
the correct respective heights. In fact it became clear that it was snapped off short so was no help 
in determining original length which was ascertained by trial and error. The design of the fixed 
link of the upper pair is unknown. The parts list states it is made up from riveted construction and 
it has to work with the ends of other pieces, the design of which is known. There is one extremely 
poor photograph which appears to show a built up flat plate assembly and the parts are described 
in a similar manner to the ones on the lifting mechanism links that are drawn so some sort of 
riveted flat plate assembly is considered probable. The hand book states that "this drawing (of the 
screen props) relates to the Mark V. The ones fitted to the Mark 1X are similar in principle but 
differ in detail construction, in particular the joints are offset". Nothing can be gleaned from this. 
The design chosen fits the above criteria (Except can not really be considered as offset) but 
needed to be exact size before being flame cut as no adjustment was possible in assembly. In the 
event of further information coming to light or original parts being recovered from Studland then 
they can be corrected and replaced in the future.

Navigation equipment
The drivers compass bracket and the P8 compass were recovered from Studland and the compass 
guard show deformation probably sustained when the driver was exiting (or attempting to exit) 
the vehicle as it sank. This deformation will be retained. The rear compass mounting is the correct 
part but actually removed from a Cruiser hulk on Salisbury Plain. The fitting between this 
mounting and the rear rhs trackguard is completely unknown except for one poor photograph of 
Mark V's and IX's on a hard at Gosport so will have to be fabricated from scratch.